Algorithm propagation use cases (#17)
ESA-APEx/apex_documentation: propagation/index.qmd

# From Earth Observation Application to Service

One of the primary goals of APEx is to support ESA projects in transforming their EO applications into re-usable, scalable, on-demand services.

Today, most ESA projects generate a variety of results. These can include for instance derived products in the form of
raster files, (open-source) software toolboxes for processing EO data, or even a 'system' or web service that generates results
on demand.

What ESA envisions with APEx, is a focus on on-demand services as a key project outcome, built using standardized web service APIs.
These web services can encapsulate software toolboxes or be used to generate maps that can be disseminated in a classic way.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe describe or link to key advantages of on demand services.
```suggestion
On-demand services allow end-users to generate tailor-made products, without having to perform complex software installation, input data retrieval, software maintenance, or manage compute services. As a service provider, your improvements reach your users immediately.
```

To offer your algorithm as an on-demand service, it must be available for execution on an APEx-compliant
algorithm hosting platform. Currently, APEx supports the integration of services on platforms that adhere to the
APEx [compliance guidelines](../interoperability/algohostingenv.md). It is important to note that this list of
supported platforms is expected to grow as APEx evolves.

For openEO UDPs:

* [openEO platform](https://openeo.cloud)
* [CDSE openEO federation](https://dataspace.copernicus.eu)

For OGC Processes/Application Package:

* [ELLIP](https://ellip.terradue.com)

:::{.callout-tip}
# Is Your Platform APEx-Compliant?
If your platform meets the APEx [interoperability and compliance guidelines](../interoperability/algohostingenv.md),
we encourage you to reach out to the APEx team to get it added to the list.
:::

### Onboarding your service on the ESA Network of Resources

A key feature of the resulting on-demand services is that they can be onboarded in the ESA [Network of Resources (NoR)](https://nor-discover.org/).
This integration enhances the service’s visibility and opens up a potential additional revenue stream for the project.

> An important step of the onboarding on the NoR is setting the price, expressed in euros per km². The final price of the

Reviewer 2: not necessarily per km2 
it really depends on the function, e.g. it can be per file

Reviewer: So can we list what options are 'allowed', or provide more accurate description of the intent?
- per km² of output data
- per input product 
- per output km² x time range x band count

I believe the main requirement is that it should be a 'predictable' measure, so not depending on cpu hours. Next to that, similar services should be comparable price-wise. So avoiding arbitrary differences is important.

Author: From a user point of view, doesn't it make sense to align and simplify (as much as possible) the final cost of a service? 

Based on previous experiences, we mainly see that users are having challenges with estimating the total cost for their purpose. Having a wide range of possible units could make this even more challenging, additionally, as users may have a difficult time translating their needs to certain units, such as the number of files or input products being processed.

Reviewer: I agree with @JanssenBrm, so disregard my previous suggestion, or at least the one about 'per input product'.
For providers it's a relatively small thing to convert a price 'per file' to 'per km²', especially given that most 'files' have a similar size. When the file size is varying a lot, then the 'per file' pricing would also not make a lot of sense.

This integration enhances the service’s visibility and opens up a potential additional revenue stream for the project.

An important step of the onboarding on the NoR is setting the price, expressed in euros per km². The final price of the
service is determined by the project consortium and can be supported by APEx tooling. In general, the price needs to cover:

- The processing cost
- A margin for fluctuation in processing cost
- Optionally, a revenue margin for the project

Currently, it is the responsibility of the algorithm hosting platform to add services to their NoR offering. This approach ensures that
APEx retains a neutral position, allowing for direct negotiations between platform provider and service provider. Consequently, it
is also the responsibility of the platforms to provide an SLA (Service Level Agreement) to the end user. In case of service malfunctions,
the end user will interact directly with the platform for support.

## How can APEx support your project?

The level of support depends on if you are:

* An ongoing or upcoming ESA EOP project
* A completed EOP project
* A non ESA project

> * Any other EO application or algorithm developer

Reviewer 3: yes would be good but not sure if we have full clarity on this yet, e.g. for some propagation steps the effort is on the algo PI side, other services (cloudification, enhancement) require assessment and offer by APEx consortium... 
For ongoing or upcoming ESA EOP project we can certainly say: discuss this with your TO
For non (esa) projects: APEx propagation services will become available in the NOR in 2026

> The level of support depends on if you are:
> 
> * An ongoing or upcoming ESA EOP project
> * A completed EOP project
> * A non ESA project
> * Any other EO application or algorithm developer

Author: ```suggestion
The level of support available depends on your project's status:

* **Ongoing or upcoming ESA EOP projects**: We recommend discussing APEx support directly with your TO.
* **Completed ESA EOP projects**: Please reach out to us to explore how APEx can help propagate and maintain your project's results.
* **Non-ESA projects**: APEx propagation services will be available through the ESA Network of Resources (NoR) starting in 2026.
```
